---
layout: post
title: _FORTIFY_SOURCE
author: MaskRay
tags: [gcc,glibc,llvm]
---

Updated in 2024-08.

glibc 2.3.4 introduced `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` in [2004](https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=commit;h=b5cc329c4fb831ce99cd683caf3c5b5114c90010) to catch security errors due to misuse of some C library functions.
The initially supported functions were `fprintf, gets, memcpy, memmove, mempcpy, memset, printf, snprintf, sprintf, stpcpy, strcat, strcpy, strncat, strncpy, vfprintf, vprintf, vsnprintf, vsprintf` and focused on buffer overflow detection and dangerous printf `%n` uses.
The implementation leverages inline functions and `__builtin_object_size` (see [[PATCH] Object size checking to prevent (some) buffer overflows](https://sourceware.org/pipermail/gcc-patches/2004-September/150278.html)).
More functions were added over time and `__builtin_constant_p` was used as well. As of 2022-11 glibc defines 79 default version `*_chk` functions.

<!-- more -->

Let's walk through a simple C program to see how fortify source works with a modern glibc.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

char a[4];

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
  strcpy(a, argv[1]);
  puts(a);
}
```

Compile this program with `-D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2` together with optimization level `-O1` or above.

Many headers transitively include `features.h`. This header checks fortify level and optimization level, and defines `__USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL`.
```c
#if defined _FORTIFY_SOURCE && _FORTIFY_SOURCE > 0
# if !defined __OPTIMIZE__ || __OPTIMIZE__ <= 0
#  warning _FORTIFY_SOURCE requires compiling with optimization (-O)
# elif !__GNUC_PREREQ (4, 1)
#  warning _FORTIFY_SOURCE requires GCC 4.1 or later
# elif _FORTIFY_SOURCE > 2 && (__glibc_clang_prereq (9, 0)                    \
                               || __GNUC_PREREQ (12, 0))

#  if _FORTIFY_SOURCE > 3
#   warning _FORTIFY_SOURCE > 3 is treated like 3 on this platform
#  endif
#  define __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL 3
# elif _FORTIFY_SOURCE > 1
#  if _FORTIFY_SOURCE > 2
#   warning _FORTIFY_SOURCE > 2 is treated like 2 on this platform
#  endif
#  define __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL 2
# else
#  define __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL 1
# endif
#endif
#ifndef __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL
# define __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL 0
#endif
```

Our program includes `string.h`. This header provides a declaration of `strcpy` and includes `bits/string_fortified.h`.
```c
extern char *strcpy (char *__restrict __dest, const char *__restrict __src)
     __THROW __nonnull ((1, 2));
...

#if __GNUC_PREREQ (3,4)
# if __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL > 0 && defined __fortify_function
/* Functions with security checks.  */
#  include <bits/string_fortified.h>
# endif
#endif
```

`bits/string_fortified.h` defines
```c
__fortify_function char *
__NTH (strcpy (char *__restrict __dest, const char *__restrict __src))
{
  return __builtin___strcpy_chk (__dest, __src, __glibc_objsize (__dest));
}
```

`__fortify_function` is a macro which expands to `extern __inline __attribute__ ((__always_inline__)) __attribute__ ((__gnu_inline__)) __attribute__ ((__artificial__))`.
<!-- extern inline __attribute__((__always_inline__)) __attribute__((__gnu_inline__)) -->
Therefore this declares an `extern inline` GNU inline function which is only used for inlining and is not compiled on its own (no definition in the relocatable object file).
The GNU attribute `gnu_inline` is also available in C++ mode and provides the desired inlining semantics.
(In LLVM, the function has the `available_externally` linkage, instead of having the `linkonce_odr` linkage in a COMDAT.)
(Since there is an external definition in libc, the `extern inline` GNU inline function is like an `inline` C99 inline function.)

`always_inline` tells the compiler to always inline a direct call to the function. This is important for `__builtin_object_size` in the callee to know the argument object.

When debug information is produced, `artificial` marks the function as an artificial entity (`DW_AT_artificial`):

> Any debugging information entry representing the declaration of an object or type artificially generated by a compiler and not explicitly declared by the source program may have a DW_AT_artificial attribute, which is a flag.

`__glibc_objsize` uses a compiler built-in function to determine the object size.
```c
/* Fortify support.  */
#define __bos(ptr) __builtin_object_size (ptr, __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL > 1)
#define __bos0(ptr) __builtin_object_size (ptr, 0)

/* Use __builtin_dynamic_object_size at _FORTIFY_SOURCE=3 when available.  */
#if __USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL == 3 && (__glibc_clang_prereq (9, 0)                  \
                                 || __GNUC_PREREQ (12, 0))
# define __glibc_objsize0(__o) __builtin_dynamic_object_size (__o, 0)
# define __glibc_objsize(__o) __builtin_dynamic_object_size (__o, 1)
#else
# define __glibc_objsize0(__o) __bos0 (__o)
# define __glibc_objsize(__o) __bos (__o)
#endif
```

With `_FORTIFY_SOURCE==2`, `strcpy(a, argv[1]);` expands to `__builtin___strcpy_chk(a, argv[1], __builtin_object_size(a, 1));`.
`__builtin___strcpy_chk` lowers to either a `strcpy` or `__strcpy_chk` function call, depending whether the object size can be determined.

`__strcpy_chk` is used if the destination size can be determined to be a constant. `__strcpy_chk` is defined in `debug/strcpy_chk.c`:
```c
/* Copy SRC to DEST with checking of destination buffer overflow.  */
char *
__strcpy_chk (char *dest, const char *src, size_t destlen)
{
  size_t len = strlen (src);
  if (len >= destlen)
    __chk_fail ();

  return memcpy (dest, src, len + 1);
}
```

In the `strcpy(a, argv[1]);` example, since `a`'s size is known, the statement is like `__strcpy_chk(a, argv[1], 4);`.

`strcpy` is used if the destination size cannot be determined to be a constant.
```c
void foo(char *b) { strcpy(b, a); }
```

In the GCC repository, run `grep _chk gcc/builtins.def` to get the list of builtin functions for fortify source.

## `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=1` vs `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2`

```c
struct A {
  struct { char a[4]; int x; } b;
  char c[4];
} g;

void foo(char *b) { strcpy(&g.b.a[1], b); }
```

* `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=1`: `__strcpy_chk(&g.b.a[1], b, 11)`
* `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2`: `__strcpy_chk(&g.b.a[1], b, 3)`

See the GCC documentation about the difference: [Object Size Checking Built-in Functions](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Object-Size-Checking.html).

## `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=3`

Clang 8 [implemented](https://reviews.llvm.org/D56761) a new builtin function `__builtin_dynamic_object_size`.
glibc added support on 2021-12-31 and early 2022 (milestone: 2.33). See [Introduce _FORTIFY_SOURCE=3](https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=commit;h=c43c5796121bc5bcc0867f02e5536874aa8196c1) and follow-ups.

GCC ported the feature in [2021-12](https://gcc.gnu.org/git/?p=gcc.git;a=commit;h=79a89108dd352cd9288f5de35481b1280c7588a5) and glibc added support for GCC 12 [on 2022-01-12](https://sourceware.org/git/?p=glibc.git;a=commit;h=86bf0feb0e3ec8e37872f72499d6ae33406561d7).
Interestingly, this is a glibc feature that Clang support happened before GCC.

```c
void *foo(size_t a, size_t b, const void *src, size_t n) {
  void *buf = malloc(a * b);
  memcpy(buf, src, n);
  return buf;
}
```

The `memcpy` call lowers to `__memcpy_chk(buf, src, n, a * b)` where `a * b` is not a constant.
There is no multiplication overflow check for `a * b`.

See [That is not a number, that is a freed object](https://siddhesh.in/posts/that-is-not-a-number-that-is-a-freed-object.html) for a bug-prone realloc pattern discovered by `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=3`.

[GCC's new fortification level: The gains and costs](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/2022/09/17/gccs-new-fortification-level) mentioned that `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=3` improved fortification by nearly 4 times.

Some projects ignore user-specified CFLAGS and does `-U_FORTIFY_SOURCE -D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2`.
User-specified CFLAGS can defeat them by using `-Wp,_FORTIFY_SOURCE`. There will be a warning which can be suppressed with `-Wno-macro-redefined` in Clang while GCC needs a big hammer `-w`.

## Compiler diagnostics

Some buffer overflow issues can be determined at compile time (both the source and destination sizes are known).

### `-Wstringop-overflow` `-Wfortify-source`

GCC provides a warning `-Wstringop-overflow`.

Clang `-Wfortify-source` is similar. For historical reasons, some functions like `snprintf` may use [`-Wbuiltin-memcpy-chk-size`](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/commit/3e6a0be4c4531d97134daea5bd32c5564e3d34f5).

```c
char a[4];
void foo(void) { strcpy(a, "abcd"); }
```

glibc has annotated many functions with [the `access` attribute](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Common-Function-Attributes.html) (see [BZ #25219](https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=25219)).
These attributes help GCC know the accessed number of elements for pointer parameters and catch bugs at compile time.

Android bionic annotates standard library functions with `__attribute__((diagnose_if(...)))` to provide the diagnostics, but the diagnostics cannot provide size information.

## `__builtin_va_arg_pack, __builtin_va_arg_pack_len`

When the two builtin functions are available, `__va_arg_pack` is defined and some functions like `printf` are fortified as well.
As Clang's documentation indicates, the two builtin functions are not implemented.

```c
__fortify_function int
printf (const char *__restrict __fmt, ...)
{
  return __printf_chk (__USE_FORTIFY_LEVEL - 1, __fmt, __va_arg_pack ());
}
```

With `_FORTIFY_SOURCE >= 2`, `%n` causes `*** %n in writable segment detected ***` with a if `__fmt` is in a writable segment.
On Linux, `/proc/self/maps` is scanned (`sysdeps/unix/sysv/linux/readonly-area.c`).

## Clang support

Clang supports many of the builtin string functions. The support is good since <https://reviews.llvm.org/D71082> and providing a builtin function `__warn_memset_zero_len` as a glibc [workaround](https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=25399).

On the other hand, it tries to provide a more principled set of language extensions to make a better fortify source implementation.
See [pass_object_size, pass_dynamic_object_size](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#pass-object-size-pass-dynamic-object-size).
The two attributes can be used together with `overloadable` and `diagnose_if`.
See [The Anatomy of Clang FORTIFY](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/bionic/+/refs/heads/master/docs/clang_fortify_anatomy.md).
glibc 2.40 [introduced `pass_object_info` style fortified source](https://sourceware.org/pipermail/libc-alpha/2024-February/154531.html) for certain functions.
`fprintf` will be mangled as `_ZL7fprintfP8_IO_FILEU17pass_object_size1PKcz`.

glibc `misc/sys/cdefs.h` uses C inline model specific macros to check Clang support.
This makes it difficult to undefine `__GNUC_STDC_INLINE__` `__GNUC_GNU_INLINE__` in C++ mode.
See a GCC issue [c-family/c-cppbuiltin.cc: Undefine __GNUC_STDC_INLINE__ in C++ mode?](https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=107543).

```c
#if (!defined __cplusplus || __GNUC_PREREQ (4,3) \
     || (defined __clang__ && (defined __GNUC_STDC_INLINE__ \
                               || defined __GNUC_GNU_INLINE__)))
# if defined __GNUC_STDC_INLINE__ || defined __cplusplus
#  define __extern_inline extern __inline __attribute__ ((__gnu_inline__))
#  define __extern_always_inline \
  extern __always_inline __attribute__ ((__gnu_inline__))
# else
#  define __extern_inline extern __inline
#  define __extern_always_inline extern __always_inline
# endif
#endif
```

## Flexible array member

Before C99 introduced flexible array member, many projects had used a proto-flexible-array-member feature by abusing the last array member of a structure.
GCC and Clang have implemented workarounds for such code.
See [__builtin_object_size(P->M, 1) where M is an array and the last member of a struct fails](https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=101836) how the workarounds make `__builtin_object_size` prone to return -1 and defeat `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` for some code.

## Symbol interposition

Redirected symbol names require interposers to define more symbols. E.g. umockdev [needed to define](https://github.com/martinpitt/umockdev/issues/176) `readlinkat`.
pipewire wrapped `openat` and chose to [disable `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` locally](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/pipewire/pipewire/-/merge_requests/1311/).

## `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` vs sanitizers

In terms of bug catching capability, `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` does not perform as well as some dynamic instrumentation tools. There are many cases it cannot handle.
The buffer overflow checks can be detected by AddressSanitizer and HWAddressSanitizer's interceptors as well.
Integer multiplication overflow (e.g. `__fread_chk`) can be detected if libc functions are instrumented with UndefinedSanitizer. (For performance consideration, libc needs to compile in multiple modes.)
`_FORTIFY_SOURCE`'s strength lies in its deployment convenience and very small overhead (code size, performance, memory usage).

When a sanitizer is used, generally `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` should be disabled since sanitizer runtime does not implement most `*_chk` functions.
Using `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` will regress error checking (asan/hwasan/tsan) or cause false positives (msan).

I think it will be interesting if someone can compare `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` with some mature static analyzers.

## Adoption

* Fedora Core 4 started to enable `_FORTIFY_SOURCE`.
* Gentoo <https://bugs.gentoo.org/259417>. The hardened profile [adopted](https://bugs.gentoo.org/847148) `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=3` for GCC in 2023-01. Clang tracker bug <https://bugs.gentoo.org/851111>
* SUSE Linux 10.0 started to enable `_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2`.

## Alternative implementations

<https://git.2f30.org/fortify-headers/> is a standalone implementation. It is libc-agnostic and overlays the system headers.

NetBSD implemented `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` in 2006-11. (`Add a BSD-licensed re-implementation of the gcc-4.1 libssp.`)
In 2017, [newlib](http://www.sourceware.org/newlib/) ported the NetBSD implementation.

Since 2007, Apple's Libc has included an implementation in the `secure/` directory.

ChromeOS patches glibc to use Clang-style `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` which is based on the `pass_object_info` attribute. For more information, see <https://crbug.com/638456>.

[Android bionic](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/bionic/) added GCC-style `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` in [2012-06](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/bionic/+/0a2301598c207fd1b50015984942fee5e8511593).
It gained Clang-style `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` support in [2017-02](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/bionic/+/7cc779f15c524e1622f7d5b1c7e82e6ffc6677fd) and removed GCC-style `_FORTIFY_SOURCE` support in [2018-07](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/bionic/+/0d1a8a5b0b78e0109c55b8f7a142488150b60cd6).

Linux kernel introduced `CONFIG_FORTIFY_SOURCE` in [2017-07](https://git.kernel.org/linus/6974f0c4555e285ab217cee58b6e874f776ff409). Use `CONFIG_FORTIFY_SOURCE=y`.

## Miscellaneous

For sanitizers using interceptors, do not use `_FORTIFY_SOURCE`.
See [All about sanitizer interceptors#_FORTIFY_SOURCE](/blog/2023-01-08-all-about-sanitizer-interceptors#fortify_source).

<https://github.com/siddhesh/fortify-metrics> estimates how much of a program or project is fortified.

<https://github.com/serge-sans-paille/fortify-test-suite> provides a test suite.

A `-D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2` compile may optimize more than a `-U_FORTIFY_SOURCE` one (<https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/60389>).
With `-D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2`, Clang knows the first argument is non-null and may make corresponding optimization.
With `-U_FORTIFY_SOURCE`, Clang lowers `memset` to `llvm.memset.p0.i64` which [does not capitalize the `nonnull` attribute](https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-do-not-optimize-on-basis-of-attribute-nonnull-in-glibc-headers/43547).
```cpp
extern void *memset (void *__s, int __c, size_t __n) noexcept (true) __attribute__ ((__nonnull__ (1)));
...
extern __inline __attribute__ ((__always_inline__)) __attribute__ ((__gnu_inline__)) __attribute__ ((__artificial__)) void *
 memset (void *__dest, int __ch, size_t __len) noexcept (true)
{
  return __builtin___memset_chk (__dest, __ch, __len,
     __builtin_object_size (__dest, 0));
}
```
